# Topic-modeling-using-reference-documents

The goal of topic modelling is to find or predict the unobserved topic or topics in documents based on the text. The simplest approaches involve construction of numeric matrices of word occurrences in documents. Simple methods such as cosine similarity or k-means may be used to cluster documents together, with clustering now representing topics. However, this does not consider word order or other structure common to the documents. More sophisticated approaches such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation model word frequencies dependent on cluster assignment of the documents, but again each document is considered as a "bag of words". Hidden Markov Models provide an attractive framework as consecutive words typically relate to the same topic. However, HMMs for topic models are difficult to fit as they have many parameters and many local maxima. This project will approach the task in a semi-supervised way. However rather than fitting a model to documents of known topic and then use the fitted model to predict topic(s) in a target document, the aim is to model the target document as a mixture of reference documents given groups of reference documents labelled as relating to the same topics. This model is inspired by a powerful and popular set of models in the statistical genetics literature wherein chromosomes of unknown ancestry are modelled as mixtures of reference chromosomes on known ancestry, with ancestry changes happening as a Poisson process along the chromosome. To this end, the project will regard sentences as the natural unit of topics. i.e. assume that each sentence relates to one and only one topic at a time. Consecutive sentences are modelled as likely relating to the same topic, with rarer changes of topic. A Hidden Markov Model framework is proposed and estimation of the transition probabilities between topics on consecutive sentences will be performed via Expectation Maximization. Different from existing approaches that use HMMs for topic modelling, a novel model for the emission of sentences as imperfectly copied sentences from the reference documents negates the need to de-construct sentence structure. 

References 
"Integrating Topics and Syntax", Griffiths, L., Steyvers, M., Blei, D., and Tenenbaum, B. (NIPS, 2005). 
"A genetic atlas of human admixture history", Hellenthal, G., Busby, G. B., Band, G., Wilson, J. F., Capelli, C., Falush, D., and Myers, S. (Science, 2014).
